Dear Joanne:  

A friend asked me about the play and this is what I wrote .. I haven’t edited 
… so this is rather long.  Sorry I didn’t get to you earlier in the year.  k

The story of the play ... sorry there has to be a bit of background.

I was very fortunate in my early years as I had several sets of parents.  My 
own parents who were greatly committed to their daughters being exposed to 
"culture" and who provided piano and singing lessons, regular outings to 
museums, operas, the symphony, the ballet and the planetarium, as well as other 
parenting stuff.

Then I had my "theatre parents".  Alex  (after whom my son is named) and 
Dorothy Goostry.  Very good friends of my parents.  Dorothy took my sisters and 
me and her children to children's theatre performances.  One of my earliest 
memories is of a play about Robots who got "hatched" too soon.  As we got older 
Dorothy also gave us weekly puppet lessons, and when we were teens, ran a teen 
improv group out of the Langley Players Theatre.

Both Alex and Dorothy were very involved in little theatre as directors and 
actors and our whole family went to every production, no matter how gritty or 
"adult" the themes.  Alex cast me in my first real play - at 14 ... I played 
the 16 year old teacher in a play Dorothy wrote entitled "Langley Days" and the 
very next season was the young  female lead in a piece called "the long 
Christmas Dinner".  I was a member of Langley Players from 14 until I left 
Langley to move to Vancouver as a university student.

My other "parents" were Jean Sampson - my piano and voice teacher, and Leonard 
Woods, my theory, harmony and counterpoint teacher.  I took lessons from Jean 
for 10 years - and she also took me to concerts, and, as she sometimes sang in 
the chorus of the Vancouver Opera, would take me to rehearsals and ensure I met 
and had a session with visiting coaches who came through town.  Leonard put up 
with a "know it all" teen who didn't like lots of classical music, and finally 
instilled a love and understanding of the mechanics of music and the reasons 
behind all those repeats and forms.

So that's the cast ... along with a woman I never met, a friend of Leonard's 
called Joan Buckly.

When I was young, Alex and my father were both teaching at Aldergrove Secondary 
School. Alex taught theatre and my dad taught physics and math.  And, Alex 
always had my dad on board to do backstage stuff. Dad designed and built a big 
saw blade for a melodrama, and a wind machine, and all sorts of other things 
over the years.

Apparently, one day Alex was talking with Leonard and Jean about the lack of 
musicals appropriate for teen voices and by the end of the evening they had 
decided to write one. 

The process took 2 years.  Leonard brought his friend Joan on board and with 
Alex and Dorothy they mapped out a plot.   Leonard was well established in the 
Vancouver art scene.  He actually worked as the sculpture instructor at the 
Vancouver School of Art, and he was well connected. The CBC had been doing a 
study of the folk songs of Newfoundland, and had financed someone to travel 
throughout the region and make recordings of the music of different regions, 
which they then made available to music academics.  As Leonard had been a 
student of Jean Coulthard (you may have to look her up) - she invited him to do 
some transcribing and interpretive work with her.  So, with the songs of 
Newfoundland in his head, and the play set in Newfoundland, Leonard composed a 
set of songs for the show, mirroring the modes and traditions of Newfoundland.

Together Leonard and Joan wrote the script.  It was vetted by Dorothy and Alex 
- as it was a first time script for the writers.  Then, Jean, went over the 
music to ensure that it was appropriate for teen voices, and was set at the 
right pitch, etc.

Finally, after two years of work, the play was workshopped by Aldergrove 
Secondary School, with Alex as director.

The play is called:

BELBRIGGAN BAY - (I call it BBB for short)
“How the boys and girls of the village brewed a pretty kettle of fish.”
A LITTLE FOLK OPERA IN TWO ACTS
For Two Adults and a Group of Young People

Leonard and Joan were adamant that the two adult leads be played by adults.  
So, Alex enlisted my dad - who had a lovely baritone -  as "Jonathan" the 
crusty old sea captain, and another teacher as "Biddy" a rather fey older woman 
of the village.

I was 5 or 6 when the play was performed. I don't remember much of it.  I 
remember Dorothy (who was line coach for the adults) being at our place a lot 
and Dad and the woman who played Biddy rehearsing in our front room.  I 
remember dad growing a beard for the part.

I remember the lead boy and how high he could jump in the hornpipe, my dad 
dancing a hornpipe, and various scenes.

CBC was very excited about the play, and sent technicians out from Vancouver to 
record it (audio) and there was talk of a re-write and then having it put on by 
professionals in Toronto, etc. etc.  (I now have all the paper work - it was a 
VERY BIG THING in the very early 60's.)

As a theatre teacher, I often looked for BBB.  I thought it might be an 
appropriate piece for my kids.  But Alex and Dorothy had no copy, Jean was 
dead, and I had lost touch with Leonard and assumed he was dead.  I found 
references to it in the CBC archives and pictures of the production at 
Aldergrove Secondary School when I went there one year, but I never found a 
copy of the script.

Last year, when I was visiting Dorothy and Alex in the old folks home where 
they now reside (I try to get to see them 3 or 4 times over the summer when I'm 
down south) Alex mentioned that Leonard was still alive and still living at the 
same address.  I immediately called him and he told me he thought he had a copy 
of the play somewhere.

I spent three very interesting days with him.  He is now 90 years old.  He 
can't sculpt anymore, but he was just putting the finishing touches on his 4th 
opera, and he had a set of poems that his publishers want to produce, but he 
was still working on the drawings that he wanted to put next to each of his 
poems.

The first day was torturous .. as he is not in any way methodical.  Together we 
went through countless filing cabinets, and found the script in one, letters 
from the CBC in another, later versions of the script somewhere else, and the 
music scattered throughout the piles and piles and piles in his house (he's 
been writing music for 70+ years ... there's a lot of it).

Leonard very graciously allowed me to take everything away and photocopy it.  
Then I read it and decided that, with some revision, it would make a charming 
play and it would be SO nice to remount it.

So I returned everything to Leonard and talked about the process of revising 
(after all, one can't alter a script without the permission of the authors).  
Joan Buckly is now dead, but Leonard was very open to taking on this task with 
me.

We spent part of that day talking about the spirit of the piece and the nature 
of the changes I thought might have to be done, and then we had a great 3 hours 
or so of going through the music.  Leonard hadn't even looked at it for over 40 
years, but he's a great sight reader, and things came back to him quickly.

THEN I took the script to Alex and Dorothy to talk about it with them.  They 
are getting very old and feeble, but it was amazing to see how the years just 
dropped away as we talked, and they remembered so many things and had so many 
good ideas.  I actually had the director's script with me, so Alex could look 
as his notes and decipher them for me.  This, of course, brought back more 
memories.  It was a very good and productive day.

A few days later I returned to Leonard's and we spent many more hours with the 
music.  I wanted to get the flavour into my head, as all of the music is hand 
written and not easy to read, and I'm not the best sight reader.

So I took the whole thing back with me, and hired my friend Jen to re-type the 
script (it had been typed on a typewriter and copied with a gestetner - so you 
can imagine the quality).  Then I sent a copy to Leonard with notes on where I 
thought the story needed changes.

In the meantime Leonard had been going over his music.  You grow a lot 
artistically in 40 years and he was not happy with all the music.  So, 
throughout this year, he has been revising his music (making a lot of it 
simpler, and more in tune with a folk sound), and I have tried to find time to 
go over the script.

I must say it is an inspiration to work with Leonard.  It's amazing to work 
with someone who has talents in so many areas and who is so married to art.  He 
is the humblest of men, and the work is what is important to him.

And he is SO very open to suggestions.  There is a "Ballad of the Irish 
Princess" that Biddy sings about a woman who is taken from her home and can 
never return, and it ended in a major key.  When I told Leonard that I thought 
it should stay in the minor, he thought about it for a few weeks, decided I was 
right, and re-wrote the ending.

In the second act, when Jonathan and Biddy decide to marry - the boys and 
Jonathan do a hornpipe.  It is SO clever.  The boys start the dance, and when 
Jonathan enters, because he is a crusty old guy, the music turns a bit 
discordant and surly, before reverting back to it's fun self with the re-entry 
of the boys.

But there was no mirroring dance for the girls.  In the first act, after the 
Ballad of the Irish Princess, the girls decide to cast a love charm for Biddy, 
who is obviously lonely, and they have a lovely little "enchantment song".  I 
suggested to Leonard that it would be a more balanced piece if the girls had a 
dance in the first act, and that the enchantment song was a great venue for a 
circle dance.  He has just sent me an amazing centre section for this piece 
which is fairy like in it's delicacy. 

This summer we are hoping to be able to get together for a few days and really 
go over the script.  I'm trying to convince Leonard to do away with a few 
things and I don't like the end of the first act ... but he does, so we'll see 
what compromise we can come to.

I'm just hoping that Leonard's health stays strong.  I'd SO love him to see it 
remounted.  And for him to see all the things we can do now ... they didn't 
have fog machines back then, or easy directional lighting, or the ability to do 
back lights, or sound capabilities of having the audience think that a flock of 
birds is flying right over them.  If we do get to re-mount it, I'll move heaven 
and earth to find a way to fly him up here for the opening night.

Well, this has been a tome, sorry, but I get very excited about my projects. 

